# Recollections from Derek Parfit Memorial, All Souls College, 3 June


Derek Parfit died on 1 January 2017. He was widely mourned across the philosophy community. I was particularily struck by the sad event, since I had seen Parfit in person for the first time only a few months earlier, at the EAGxOxford conference for which I was on the organising team. That may well have been his last public appearance, and I felt a bittersweet awe at the though of having, without realising it, experienced a small chunck of philosophy history. 

Through my involvment in effective altruisn, I had begun to glipmse into the small world of Oxford moral philosophers. In this microcosm, Parfit's death was a monumental event. I remember my whole news feed filling up with homages when the news broke, on the Nous website.

Parfit was buried in February 2017, as I was later to find out. In May 2017, I was fortunate to receive, through my good friend Dominik Peters, an invitation to a memorial event in Parfit's honour which would be held on 3 June at All Souls College.

I awaited the day with trepidation. Unsure about the formality of the event, but reasoning that it was safer to over-dress, I wore a suit and a necktie, which was grey because I did not own a black one.

The memorial was scheduled to begin at 2pm, with entrance through the imposing Hawksmoor gate on the west side of All Sould College. It was a hot Trinity term day, and the streets were filled with a joyous breeze. It was exam season. As I cycled down Parks Road towards Radcliffe square, I passed students in the distinctive attire of their just-completed trashings, as well as a uniformed troop of visiting japanese schoolgirls by the entrance of Hertford college.

At 2pm, I gave my name to a friendly porter who stood guarding the enormous gate, armed with a clipboard. Entering the college through the ornate and forbidding Hawksmoor gate, open, on this day only, for the rememberance of one of the great philosophers of the century -- in that moment I felt like a character in my own romanic novel. For the first time ever, I had stepped inside the main quadrangle of Alls Souls College. Its two high white spires stretched skywards in their full glory above the gigantic circular lawn. They are rumoured to have been the origin of the expression 'ivory tower', and I was about to commemorate a man who had made his life one of complete devotion to his academic projects inside All Souls.

We congregated in the Codrington Library, which for this purpose had been fitted with chairs for the approximately one hundered attendees. On the walls were photographs of Oxford, Venice and St Petersburg by Parfit. I recognised in them a perfectionist architectural photographer, a role I had myself played in my teenagehood. In a charmingly odd homage to one of te man's oddities, in one corner of the library stood a coat hanger with about fifteen neckties of the same shade of red - they had been Parfit's uniform for the last decades.

Jeff MacMahan opened the proceedings. He asked us to please refrain from applauding after the speakers, and framed the event as a celebration of Parfit's life rather than a solemn and ceremonial mourning. I found both of these choices to be in very good taste, after the event I remarked to myself that Jeff had fully risen to the challenge of organising this memorial.

Seventeen people in total were due to speak that afternoon. At a normal funeral or memorial, this list would have all but guaranteed that the proceedings would run over schedule and that the audience would eventually sink into a guilty boredom. But under Jeff's watchful eye, we ran on time. Due, I suspect, in no small part to Jeff's efforts to set the tone right, almost all the speakers skillfully married entertaining anecdotes, poignant recollections, and heartfelt homage. I felt awe and bitterness.

The first speaker was Theodora Ooms, nee Parfit, Derek's sister. She opened with the breathtaking narrative of her first memory of Derek, in 1944. I am paraphrasing my doubtless error-prone recollections from her speech, so I must apologise in advance for any inaccuracies (and the same goes for all other speakers). The Parfits had been medical missionnaries in China, but in '44 they had to be evacuated to India, from where they made their way to the United States. Derek was 1 or 2 years old at the time, and Theodora remembered huddling with him inside the cockpit of a helicopter, next to the aircraft's machine gun, watching the nightime countryside glide below them. Only the lights of other helicopters pierced through the blackness in occasional flashes.

Later the programme called for Stephen Fry to give his remarks. To my disappointment, he turned out to be a newspaper editor or magazine columnist of some kind, who had known Derek in his teenage years, and not, as I had somewhat naively expected, the larger-than-life British comedian and author. His was one of the stranger performances; he was determined to demonstrate that the Derek he knew had not been an eccentric but a perfectly well-adapted and normal young man. At Eton, Derek had been a multi-talented and popular boy. He excelled at all he tried, and even became a clever social climber, having gotten himself elected to an elite society of Etonians by offering the other schoolboy members marrons glaces the night before the election. Dominik and I both felt a slight awkwardness at Fry's speech. He seemed determined to acquit Derek of what he preceived as the unjust charge of exccentricity. But Parfit's monomanical and indeed extreme devotion to philosophy, later in life, was not only an undeniable fact, but was also generally recognised as an endearing mark of genius rather than a character flaw. Thinking back on it now, though, I'm glad Fry said what he had to say. At funerals and the like, people sometimes paint caricuatures, as if the way to honour the dead was to turn them from a human into an archetype. Fry's earnestness was obvious: he had a vivid memory of Derek, his own piece of the truth, and he refused to let the world at large paint Derek as the mad savant.

Fry was followed by Johnathan Glover, an elderly philosopher who was the only speaker to venture into the dangerous territory of discussing the substance of Parfit's philosophical views. His decision to quarrel with the deceased's conception of moral philosophy as finding *the* universal and consistent morality also gave me mixed feelings. A memorial to a dead philosoher is not the place to propose a sloppy three-minute rebuttal of his core assumptions, I thought at first. But later someone remarked that Parfit himself had no patience for small-talk, and always got right down to discussing his disagreements with any philosopher he met. That person told me: @Parfit probably would have found all of the other speeches at this memorial boring@.

Glover had said that Parfit's moral universalism @might be wrong@, but he finished by turning to the only one of Parfit's views which Glover was confident couldn't possibly be right. This was Parfit's pronouncement that @If my arguments are not correct, my life shall have been wasted@ - a thought made truly gut-wrenching and awesome by the fact that, coming from Parfit, one knew it was not grandstanding, he truly believed it.

Jeff MacMahan offered, in the intended spirit of this memorial meeting, some of the most entertaining anecdotes, but this cheer, he said, cloacked a heavy heart. I particularly remember the bittersweet and revealing story of a note Derek had written to Joyce Carol Oates after her husband's death. Part of it had said: @I find comforting the thought that people who do not exist in the present do in fact exist in the past, though we cannot see them, just like someone who has gone to New  Zealand still exists, though not here@. The seriousness with which Parfit took his philosophy is so far removed from the mere academic jousting to which we are used that it seems funny. And I did laugh and this anecdote and others. But I was also in awe.

[larry temkin photo of all souls - recording]

There 